Did I just leave? Yeah, he waved. Did he say it to go? He waved. Did he message me? Okay, I guess Adam had to drop off
Aaron was telling me about how so he lives in Hawaii. I know if you're aware, you could probably
hear the birds and the nice things. I wasn't aware. That's amazing. That's why you're so tan.
You've got the nice complexion. Hawaii. I was trying at the last minute, I realized, oh,
I should really do this from like an outdoor location that looks like really Hawaii.
But my my own backyard, it looks it has this one corner that looks like super Hawaii.
Well, there is, I can't predict when the gardeners are going to come. So there's like a 10% chance.
Your indoors looks Hawaii though too. I can like tell you're in Hawaii with his background.
Yeah, so it's not bad. I feel like my backyard can kind of look like it's Hawaii because all
the trees in Miami are imported from like Asia. It has like that tropical vibe.
But he was telling me that he went to go get that mic and you can't next day order anything in Hawaii.
Oh, that makes sense. So he's like a best buy. And I was talking to me and Jay where I was
conversation two days ago of like, okay, if we would like radically move somewhere, you know,
like where in the world would we consider moving? Yeah. Now they're trying to come up with criteria
to ask, and now I'm being like here's my criteria, what makes sense. One of the things I came up with
was if a new MacBook drops, how fast can I get it? Not because I literally want MacBooks right away.
Yeah, but I thought it was a really good proxy to figure out where in the world is like really
plugged in, you know, logistically. And one of the interesting answers I got was Singapore,
which has like the stereotype of being like a really high tech city. But on top of that,
it's like the logistics hub for that whole part of the world. So anything there, you just can get
immediately like there's no delays on anything. But yeah, Hawaii was not on that list.
In Miami, you can get like same day stuff, right? I don't get that in the Ozarks,
like same day with Amazon or this is like such a what's the word? What's the word like
problems when it's like a rich person problem? First world problem. Yeah, first world problem.
But yeah, we've just gotten crazy spoiled with the whole Amazon thing because in any major city,
it's absurd. Like before, it was like, oh, you pay extra and then you get like the
faster shipping. Now by default, they just deliver it to your door like several hours later.
Or like if you order the evening, it's there at like 3 a.m. So we've gotten very
spoiled by all that. Yeah, I don't get that. And then I guess Hawaii is even worse.
That sucks. Yeah. I didn't think about that. But I guess if you if you're in Hawaii,
like who cares who needs stuff, right? Is there an adjustment or you used to it?
Uh, yeah. I mean, it only comes up randomly like when, you know, some, you know, it's unlikely that
it's uncommon that I feel like I need it. But it's funny, you know, Hawaii has one of the highest
bounce rates in the world of people who move here and move back. Yeah. Yeah. And so a lot of times,
like during COVID, I had a lot of people like from the Bay Area that were like, I'm going to
move out to Hawaii. And I'm like, okay, you know, like, but just be aware that like 80% of the people
bounce, you know, and a lot of it is this. It's like people get here and they realize,
what I can't get, like, whatever my heart desires, like the instant.
Whatever rock. Did you realize you want to rock 4000 miles?
This is like a curse of islands. It's like an island is always the best place to live.
But the definition of the island is like it's on its own and everything else you need is outside
of the island. So yeah, that's, uh, that's tough. But you've been there for how long now?
Um, six years. Nice. Didn't bounce. I don't know what the technical, like, definition of
bouncing is. I don't know how long you have to stay. But six years seems like not bouncing.
Yeah. Yeah. We love it here. Yeah. What island? Yeah, I live on a wall, which is like the
ghettoist of the Hawaiian Islands, I guess, kind of how you measure. But it also has schools and
hospitals and stuff. So yeah. What is, uh, what is life like? Like, what's like a day in the life
of you? That's different than what other people would experience. I mean, a lot of it's like little
stuff, right? Like one, one of the most minor things, and I mean, you have this where you live,
Dax, but like one of the most minor things that I love that's like super important to me is like,
I wake up every morning. I take my dog for a walk in shorts and slippers. Like, it's a minor
thing, but I love it. You know, like, like, um, and there's beautiful mountains behind me and the
clouds kind of like wrap around the mountains. And I just, it's, I mean, I live in a neighborhood,
like a suburban neighborhood. So in some ways, it's just like every day, you know, like it's just,
it's just everyday life, but in the other, but you know, I used to live in San Francisco and I grew
up in Southern California, or it's warm. And the whole time I was in San Francisco, I friggin hated
it. I hated the way I just couldn't, because I grew up with like, sun every day, you know?
And so it never felt comfortable. And after 12 years living in the city with the weather,
being able to go out every morning and in shorts is like a huge luxury. But I guess like,
other sort of like, you know, everyday things, like yesterday, yesterday was like a really calm
Wednesday, which is like where we live, we don't care. Like the weather is always kind of the same,
but the, but the winds vary a lot. And the winds matter for like water sports. So you really look
forward to calm wind days. And yesterday with a dead Wednesday, and Abby, my daughter and I
went out for a paddle on a one man canoe. That's what she does, like for her sport, for school sport.
And we have like local offshore islands that are like a mile offshore that are at small,
like Ilets. And we paddled out to those and we looked at the fish and we like, you know,
we practiced. I made the canoe, like especially hard for her to paddle by sitting on the back.
Like those are like everyday tends to involve like outdoor like water stuff for us. Anyways,
that's different from the places.
The reason Adam and I were both laughing at the beginning when you were like,
you take your dog out for a walk in your shorts. That's almost that's very similar to how I describe
my day to day, except juxtapose the way you describe it. I sound like a total crazy person,
because what I do every morning is I also love the sun. I love going out and getting the sun
right away, except I'm like basically, there's in my boxers, nothing else. And I don't,
I don't walk my dog. I blow bubbles for him in the backyard and he just sprints back
and forth for 10 minutes. Yeah, same. I totally get it. We basically do the same thing.
I put clothes on. I wear clothes when I wake up. That's next goal is how long in the day can
you go without putting on clothes? That's what I remember how annoying I was when it was cold
for two weeks and I had to like put on like a sweater before going outside. Yeah, that does
sound nice though. The water, I think what I, what's cool about different places is like the hobbies,
like orient around like the physical environment. And I really should get into water sports stuff.
I've been here for a while. I've just been too busy to like develop a hobby,
but I really want to pick up something that involves that because you can't do that in most
places, you know? Yeah, yeah. I mean, I talk about that a lot with my kids, you know,
it's like, and with other people who who visit us is like that, that I also find that really
interesting how the lifestyle like, you know, I mean, I guess it shouldn't be surprising,
but I think that in, you know, like hyper connected, like online world, people just sort of assume that,
you know, every place in some ways they have this like deep assumption that life will be the same,
but there's these like ways that it's different and it has to do with like the physical environment,
you know, like culture, culture like adapts to the physical environment. And like, you know,
Hawaii is like famous for surfing and blah, blah, blah, but where we live in Hawaii,
it's always onshore winds because of the trade winds. So like 300 days out of a year,
it's onshore winds, which is bad for surfing. People don't surf here on this part of the island,
and what is the hobby instead is this either like type wording is really popular here,
those sort of like wind sports or that's what I want to get into. Yeah. Yeah, it's pretty big here,
too, or like canoeing paddling. And so I always like laughed at these like old men who are into
paddling. When I moved here, I'm like, I'm never going to do that. I'm going to surf, you know,
blah, blah, blah. And like, you know, I did try to, but then it involved like driving 30 minutes every
day. And then I like tried to canoe one day and I was like, wow, this is pretty fun, you know,
and it's like, I'm surprising. People do it because it's fun, you know? Yeah.
Also, those people, like I follow a bunch of people that are like, kind of fitness space,
a lot of them are older, they are so ripped and all they do is paddle. It's like such a good
workout for your whole body. Well, that's a workout. Yeah. Yeah, we go to the gym and we try to
simulate it, right? Like we're in a boat canoeing. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's a workout. You're out
on the water. It's beautiful. You know, it's, I think it's like the same reason that people like,
you know, like backcountry skiing, you know, which involves a lot of walking and stuff and, you know,
mostly you're out in nature. And then there's like every so often, there's a little bit of
adventure too, you know? Yeah. Nice. Guys, you're making me want to go outside. I just, we've
spent the whole winter in the Ozarks inside and it's just depressing. Can't wait to do something
outside. Yeah, basically. So a quick little intro now that we were like, you know, 50 minutes.
So this is Aaron. Aaron's a founder of, is it Rossi Corp or is it Rosie Corp? I remember you
were posted yesterday, like laughing at people struggling to pronounce it and that'd be thinking
about it. I say Rossi Corp. But Rosie Corp is also correct. It's named after the Raul Sonanti,
which is Don Quixote's horse in that book. But it's also the name of the ship in the expanse,
the science fiction novel. Oh, interesting. Television series and that word. Is it a good series?
Is that a good? Yeah, it's very into sci-fi lately. So I need new ones.
Expand. Okay. The expanse, the series is, I mean, it's an investment. You know, those books are
big and there's like eight of them or something like that. Oh, geez. Okay. Yeah, it's pretty cool.
It's like they explore. It's like a future where Mars is colonized and there's like a third entity,
which is all like the mining operations, and that's right, Bill. And there's like a crazy political
tie between Earth and Mars. And then like these, the Belters, I guess I forgot that were called.
It's pretty good. Okay, I gotta write it down. Keep going. Sorry. It's been so badly.
People probably don't recognize that name, but they might recognize, I mean, they'll definitely
recognize that I talk about it incessantly. So your company makes initially made replicas,
that's how I met all of you. And then more lately, working on zero, which has been really fun.
We've got it into production past couple weeks. Adam just sitting there, like wishing he could
yeah, something. I can't wait to learn so many things on this call. I don't want to be annoying,
but like I have so many questions. And this is the thing I've hovered around just being close to
you, Dax, for so long. And I need, I need to just take the time to get up to speed. And I feel like
a lot of people listening probably do too, because there's a lot of people that probably like local
first, yeah, I've heard all this like, I just never done anything with it. And like, we all know we
should. Yeah, it's well, it's this funny, tight little circle, because the other day I posted,
because I wanted to talk to a bunch of AI companies using SST. One, I thought I would get like five
responses, we ended up getting like 30 companies that reached out. And a bunch of them were like,
Oh yeah, we're doing AI with SST. And also we're using zero. And this is such a funny little,
little circle bubble. Yeah. But yeah, I mean, the reason I was mentioning that is I think the
reason we got in this call was someone asked you a question about some of the previous things you
guys worked on prior to this, which I hadn't known much about. So we're kind of talking about like
you telling a little bit about that story. I never it's a it's a long story. So I don't I never go
like where to start or how? No, just go. We can we'll definitely we had DHH on and he talked for
like 90 minutes straight. We never said you can really do anything in the audio, the audio bars
and editor. It was just him talking and then we had him completely empty. You won't do that. So
you're fine. Do whatever you want. Yeah. I mean, so one story I always tell is that, you know,
I worked I worked at Google for 10 years. I'm actually going to interrupt you already because I
I want to say one thing before you start. So I actually technically intersected with Aaron when
I was like 15 years old, because I was a grease monkey user. And I was using it to steal gift cards
from this site that didn't protect their URLs per properly. So I like didn't know that there's
probably better way to do it. But I was like messing with a piece of monkey and I wrote some kind of
script that just kind of iterated through every combination of URL. And I and I got I think I
stole enough for like $110 worth of $5 gift cards. And I bought an Xbox hard drive. And then I got
really scared and I stopped doing it. So that was Aaron's work. Making the world a better place.
Love it. Yeah. So I after after grease monkey, I actually kind of got me the job at Google.
And I didn't work I worked on Blogger for like a very short time. I got thrown off that project
like within months. And like funny story about that. But I found myself on this project on this
this like group that was like had people that were supporting Firefox. So we at the time,
Firefox was like a not the biggest browser, but like a growing important browser. And it was really
important to Google that there be like an alternative browser and that the web succeed. And so they
were like putting money into supporting Firefox. They had they were paying people to work on
Firefox. And they're also paying people to build extensions and stuff like that. So that's how I
on that project. And one of the very first things we built, the very first thing I built on that
team, this was literally like four months into my career, was we were like brainstorming ideas for
extensions in ways that we could like ways that we could, you know, support Firefox. And we came
up with the idea of syncing bookmarks in history. So we wrote this extension for Firefox to sync
your bookmarks in history between different Firefox instances, which is now like a major feature that
like a lot of browsers have. And my friend, one of my best friends at the time that worked at Google
made this side joke to me one day, he's like, you know, we're going to be working on sync for
the rest of our careers, right? The funny thing is that like he was more of like, you know,
right on the edge of like designer and engineer, you know, these types. And he became the lead
designer of Chrome and then went on to become the lead designer of Android. Wow. So we've got like,
you know, did really, really well, no longer works at all. Forget about the rest of his career.
Never worked on sync again after that. So he learned his lesson.
So I mean, I guess like, yeah, so I worked on that little sync engine. And then at Google,
I worked on Gears, which was a way that we were trying to add sync to browsers as an extension
so that we could build off on Gmail. And then, you know, I sort of came back to sync on and off
throughout my career. And like after I left Google, I had this friend that I worked closely with
at Google and we were really inspired by Git, the version control system and how it worked
internally. Like if any of you, if anyone, if you've never ever like looked at how Git works,
like the UI that is a disaster, the CLI is a disaster, like a famously terrible disaster.
Internal design of Git is just beautiful. You know, like if you're into software,
it's just a completely inspired idea. It's just one of these, one of these like things that I feel
like is like discovered, not like invented, you know? And especially if probably a lot of people
listening to this have no familiarity with source control before Git, but like it was just this
horrifically complicated thing, you know, that didn't work at all. That was like really slow.
And so we were really inspired by this and having worked on sync like multiple times
throughout our career and knowing how complicated it was, like we had this intuition like what if,
you know, what if you could have something that worked like using the same principles as Git,
but it worked for like application data, you know? And so you could have sync, you know, that that
worked really well. So me and my friend, Raf, we started Attic Labs sort of on this, on this idea.
And we built NOMS, which was a new database basically that used sync that was very similar to Git's
internal design. But pretty quickly, after we started the project, we got scared off the original
idea of doing like application level sync because of conflict resolution. Because Git doesn't do
conflict resolution, Git just like, you know, makes me to deal with it. Yeah. And when we started
looking at that, we like didn't have any great ideas. And we're like, well, maybe, you know,
just the core idea of like, you know, syncing structured data without conflict resolution is
like useful enough by itself. And this useful enough is like a theme I feel like I hope that
we'll come back to like in this in this call. And it's something that I've, I've like learned
by less alone. And I feel like I've learned a lot from you actually, DAX about this. And so,
but but anyways, I think that was a mistake that we made early on with with NOMS. And we we sort
of like, we're like, what, what can we get away with, you know, rather than like, what's what do
people actually need, you know? And so we started trying to take this idea and making like a
synchronizing application database for it and sort of like searching for a problem, you know,
that this could solve. And we build NOMS and it's like really cool tech. And we couldn't figure
out like how to market it because we didn't start with a problem. We started with like a thing,
you know, and after like four years, like we built this really cool database and the team was
getting tired, some of the team. And so we decided to sell the company and we sold it to Salesforce.
So just to understand a little bit better, like this database, like how did it fit in
to someone? Like, is it like ends up being the primary database for your application?
We didn't know, you know, like, we were like, I mean, this sounds so stupid in retrospect,
you know, and so, and so cliche, but like, you know, we've all we've all been the exact situation.
So it's very relatable. It just sounds so stupid when you explain it 10 years later, when you're
a lot smarter. So like, you know, we, we were like, we were like, okay, what if you take, you know,
the way that that Git works, but you store structured data instead of files, you know,
internally, Git has a data structure that looks very similar to a B tree, you know, but it's not
a B tree. And databases use V trees to be fast. So we're like, what if you combine these things,
you know, what happens, you know, it was good as a go. Like, basically what NOMS is, is it's like
an embedded database, kind of like SQLite, written in go. And it has this sort of weird
data model that's not relational. It's, it's, it's more like a graph database, I guess. And that
was kind of like custom designed again, because we weren't really, I don't know why we went that
way. We had some ideas. I'm done. We did have some ideas of how it would be used and that
cost us to build this unique data model. But also I think we were kind of scared off by the
relational thing, you know, and again, we were like, what can we get away with? I feel really
embarrassed admitting this now. But, you know, it was my first startup. If that was your first
startup, like, that's pretty good. Yeah. That's, that's pretty good. You should have seen, like,
it wasn't until like my fourth startup where I started to sound like somewhat competent. So,
it's a synthetic database written in go. And it, the sort of key innovation is this data structure
called a probability tree that we invented, which is like a mashup of a B tree and, and gets like
internal content adders thing system. And you can like, I don't know, you can use it like SQLite,
except for the difference is that you can like really efficiently replicate it to somebody else,
you know, so think of like, think of like light stream, you know, you know, you can kind of do
that, but it's like built on these like get data structures. We had a bunch of ideas for how to
use this. And I think, you know, if we would have kept going, we could have like found something,
but, but the interesting story is that like after we open sourced it, so like after we sold the
company, which was really just like a aqua hire, but after we sold the company, there was this
other company called Dolt that came along, and they actually had an idea for how to like commercialize
this, and they took and they made like a successful like startup out of it. So they, they, they took
noms and they made it into a relational database, like a MySQL compatible relational database. So
they built this thing called Dolt that looks on the wire exactly like MySQL, you can use all the MySQL
tools with it. You can like, you know, you can literally store MySQL data in it and program
against it like it was MySQL. But it can also that it also has this really efficient like one way
sync built into it. Nice. What is this powers powers like regular applications or was there
like a specific type of thing that particularly? Dolt started out wanting to use it for like
sharing data sets, like their idea, their idea was that like, you know, we have like GitHub for
sharing code and like at the time like AI wasn't really going, but like with like data science
was like really popular. And, and they were like, you know, you need a place to share like public
data sets. So they created this thing called Dolt Hub. And, and they tried to like bootstrap an
environment, like an ecosystem of people sharing public data sets on there. Like a big part of
data science, I understand my understanding is that is like cleaning and like, yeah, it's not like
the actual like science part. Yeah. It's like removing mistakes from data like manually, you know.
So there is kind of, I guess there is kind of a need for like a place where you can share
these data sets. But then it also turned out that a lot of people wanted to use it like as part
of workflows. Like they wanted an application database that like supported branching basically.
So like, I, my understanding is that people, it's, it's popular with like biotech, you know,
because they're like working on these big like genome data sets and they want to support like
branching internally on these data sets. And it's also popular in my understanding with like game
developers for the same reason. It's like, they have these huge like, you know, stores that team
has been going now for I think like four years. And they have this like crazy slog, right? They're
trying to implement MySQL compatibility, you know, on a different database. It's just like,
it's just an insane amount of features, you know, to just like crank out, you know,
and like bug for bug compatibility. And that was another team that I was really inspired by
when I went back to do another startup is just like watching like how dogged they were at just
like pursuing this vision, you know, and like, and how slowly it took for it to get traction,
you know, because like, you know, initially, like just nobody cared what they were doing,
you know, and they, you know, and they just kept at it like month after month after year,
after year, you know, and it built little by little. And I, you know, I realized like, okay,
like these things, you know, they take time, you know, like people can't just drop what they're doing
and use your thing, you know, like the day they hear about it, you know, yeah, yeah, yeah, especially
and especially in DevTools, like, even if they love your thing, how often are they starting a new
project? It's like, at best, maybe a year from now, they might have the opportunity. So yeah,
patience is huge. But yeah, I mean, it's funny. So you were inspired by that. And I kind of similar
thing with a very similar mindset to you because I think this was just kind of how startups
were framed and maybe are so framed. It's all about like, chip, the smallest thing possible. And
like, you know, it doesn't matter if it's great, like, you know, you try to get traction right away,
if it doesn't work, give up on the next thing, that was like the vibe, especially like in that
time. But that's, that's kind of how I thought about everything. And it wasn't until I saw a bun
that this clicked for me, where I was like, his task is so clear, there's no mystery to it.
It's like, you just need to achieve 100% nowadays compatibility. That's a task very straightforward.
It's just going to take a lot of brutal effort to incrementally get there. And I just saw how like,
something about that simplicity is nice. And then, too, I saw the clarity of like, oh, yeah,
like, if something can be created within a month, it innately only has one month of value. It takes
four years to make buns somewhat usable. That clearly is more valuable. So just like a fundamental
level, like that kind of clicked for me. And a lot of people talk about this, like Paul Graham has
something about just do things that are hard because it drags your competitors over the same
path. So this idea has been around for a while, but yet also took me a while to not shy away from
stuff that looked too big. And instead feel the opposite, like now I get more excited when it looks
like it's really difficult. Yeah. Because the easy things are never actually, they're never
actually easy, you know, it's easy. You go and do it and turns out, you know, it's not really going
to hit the way you hoped it would. Or like, there's like a bunch of other people also doing it.
Yeah, I mean, it depends on what you mean by hard to, right? Like my co-founder,
Roth, an addict, you know, he had, I remember this day where we were looking at some,
some problem inside the data structure of blah, blah, blah. And it, you know, I think we were,
we were going to try to scale up norms to like run on S3. We actually had this idea of backing
norms by like S3, but which is now a thing that people are doing. We were looking at that. And he
would, and we realized it was going to be really hard. And he was like, well, that's great, you know,
like, because like hard we can do, you know, and, and, but there's, and that was true. But like,
there's also this other kind of hard, this like really boring, like, like, frustrating hard where,
you know, there's just like a million, like you're talking about with fun, you know, or like we
encountered this a lot at Rossi Corp with like making like stuff work with every stupid like
tool in the JavaScript ecosystem. Yeah, that's exactly what it's like.
For me, it's Prisma. Prisma has been that they've been scaling me. Prisma Pla, the lambda has
caused me so many hours. I didn't more productive trying to like dethrone Prisma than like trying
to get Prisma to like work right. I mean, like, I mean, these tools are popular because they do
something useful. So it's like, I don't want to, I don't want to like crap on, you know, these
tools and like, I don't know what it is about the JavaScript ecosystem in particular that
inspires like seven different ways to do every single thing, you know, but it's just a reality,
right? Like, yeah, you just got to get to work. You know, it's a matter of what opinion you have,
like, if you're not going to just make everything work, your thing is just not going to grow.
And that's another lesson I feel like I had to like flip my instincts on.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, yeah. So anyways, that was, that was nom's. So we sold out the Salesforce and
I think like some of the team is still there. Um, and but like I, I stayed for a little while,
not too long. Um, and then, and then left and I experimented with a few other like companies,
but I think I like still like really in my heart want to do my own thing. And I started tinkering
with sync again. Um, addicted to sync. Well, I mean, it's worth, it's worth talking about that
too. I mean, the, the reason why is because it makes really good UI, you know, um, I started my
career as a UI developer, you know, and I like making things, uh, I like making you, you know, um,
and making things really fast. And unfortunately, you know, just the reality is that like all
software today's client server, you know, um, so like when I started out doing UI development,
I was making all these JavaScript widgets and stuff like that. And you can make those
widgets really fast, but it doesn't really matter because they have to talk to the server, you know,
so you can make the menu drop down really fast, but then they click on something in the menu,
it has to wait for the server to, you know, this is like fundamental thing. And if you want to make
really good UI, you need the data local, you know, um, and so that's, that's why I keep coming back
to sync. And I think that's why like the industry keeps like coming back and looking at sync every
so often. Um, yeah. So I was like thinking about it again, um, thinking about norms and like, um,
and I stumbled across this, um, this paper. Um, I think the, the, there was like a research paper
called Calvin. I can't remember the whole title of the paper, but it introduced this idea of how
to do a distributed database. It was like a competitor to Spanner Google's, uh, a database.
It was like totally different domain, but it had this idea in it that was new to me. Um, and that
idea I realized like, um, could be used to solve the conflict resolution problem that we had in
norms. Um, like if we had that, we could add it to norms and then norms could have been used to
build like something like zeros used for today, you know, or, you know, and that, that turned into
replica. Um, so replica at a very high level of conceptually is basically norms plus this conflict
resolution mechanism. Like internally, actually like replica has doesn't use the probably tree
anymore, but when we started out it used to probably tree, um, it's this immutable B tree, um,
that allows you to like rewind it and fork and stuff like that efficiently. So like internally,
replica is just forking. And that's what makes the conflict resolution part of what makes the
conflict resolution mechanism work. And then the other part of it is like replaying functions on
this fork and that replaying functions idea, that was the idea I got from Calvin. Uh, yeah. So we
started building replica on top of norms, but like norms was written in go and that was completely
impractical for web applications. Um, because like you can theoretically compile go into like
Wasm or whatever, but the smallest binary is like five minutes of yeah. Yeah. So we rewrote it in
JavaScript. Or do we agree? No, I think we wrote it, we wrote it in Rust first. I can't remember
to take that. It's a little bit of Prisma's doing Prisma did that. And now they're going back to
at the JavaScript. I was a nightmare. Um, so that yeah, anyways, um, we rewrote it. Um, and then a
little bit later, we ripped out the probably trees because they weren't really, we have this
simpler, immutable data structure internally now. And yeah, we built replica hash. Um, and it was like,
you know, a lot more popular than anything we had done before. Like a my startup journey, like,
it was okay. So people are using this, you know, value out of it, you know, and you know, I mean,
it became like fairly popular, you know, like, um, I think like, I should have had the number,
numbers ready, but I want to say like tens of thousands of like individual developers using it,
like millions of end users, um, you have used replica hash, um, like without knowing, you know,
as part of the applications that they're using. And you know, last, we built, we worked on that for
like four years. Um, you know, it was like fairly successful, our biggest customers were sell. Um,
so, and they're still using it. Um, and like even despite it being kind of like at odds with their,
you know, marketing, like they, they get a lot better. It's, it's for their, uh, the, the common
system on the previews. Is that what it powers? Yeah, that makes sense. You know, I feel a little
bit weird, like saying this, but like, you know, people often tell me that they, you know,
that they consider replica hash like one of the leaders or like the leader in this like fledgling,
like sync industry. Um, and, uh, so like that's cool. And we, we could have like kept going with that,
but like, you know, we, we just got this like continual, like complaints and like struggles
with replica hash like from, from all of our users who were serious about it. Um,
we, we, we received like the same sorts of problems and they were basically like,
well, what do I do as my application gets more popular and there's more data in it?
Like I, the replica hash is kind of assuming this model of syncing all the data to the client,
and they're, what is ways in replica hash to sync less than all the data, but they're really hard
to use. Um, and so like the best, the easiest way to use replica hash is to sync all the data.
Um, and what do I do if my data isn't like, if, if like there's complex granular permissions in
my data, where like even syncing the right subset of data that users have permission to isn't even
like easy to, isn't even easy to do, you know, and we just kept hitting this problem. Um,
and, and along this time, like the local first movement was like gaining steam. And so a lot of
people were like hearing about local first and like thinking, Oh, I could use this for my
client server application to like make it fast. You know, they weren't really interested in like
the, the like data ownership part. They were interested in like making my application fast part,
you know, and so local first started gaining steam and we were like, you know, at some point,
we were just like, again, like this design of replica hash, it was like, we purposely,
you know, we, we, we, we consciously tried to like narrow the problem. Like I, at the time,
I wouldn't have described it as like, what can we get away with? But like really, you know,
if I'm honest with myself, you know, that, that's it, you know, like, you know, just trying to like
avoid the really hard problem, you know. Um, and so we like designed it in this way that was like,
you know, like a smaller like subset, trying to lop off the majority of the problem, you know,
which was like partial sync, you know, and permissions. And so it was zero. I think like
around like a year and a half ago, you know, I, I started getting like really frustrated with
receiving this question over and over again, and seeing like the local first movement grow and
seeing like the energy and excitement about using these tools. And like, I also, there were other
people in the space like who had interesting ideas, like this idea of replicating from postgres using
the wall was like really cool idea. And I realized that we could put some of those ideas together
and like really go after this problem and solve it. Um, and maybe do something like really general,
you know, and bring this, like this experience, you know, at the end of the day, bring this kind of
UI experience and this developer experience to like the vast majority of software, you know,
like we could make something general purpose, like the way that rest APIs are general purpose,
right? You know, yeah, and that was a really long story. So no, that was great. It's just,
I didn't realize I didn't really put it together. How long you've really technically been thinking
about this. Um, in my head, I was just like, Oh, Aaron's like the browser guy, like he likes to do
stuff with a browser features, but it's actually way more specific than that. I think what's also
really interesting. And like, I love making this point. You were like, yeah, I'm a UI engineer. I
wanted to make UI faster. And you ended up having to dig into like distributed systems, like the
way, like data stored in like little files, like, you know, all that stuff to make the UI faster.
And people nowadays, it's so easy to just to carve out this. I'm a front-end engineer
identity. But like, yeah, you're you're effectively a front-end engineer to this whole thing. But
you have to do so many different things that, you know, technically don't fall under that bubble.
So I think it's cool to like, would I see that in action over over years?
Yeah, I mean, there's I mean, there's it's it's actually a really common story in the sync and
local first base. Like the I would say the majority of people who I really respect in the space
are doing really interesting work. Sort of come from this background of like, you know,
being people who work with the pixels, you know, and like, this is so frustrating. Like,
why can't he be faster? You know, and then they hear about, you know, they hear about
sync or they hear about local first, and they start looking into it and they get really inspired
and they become distributed systems engineers. Like solve this problem.
Yeah, it's funny because I had the I had the opposite experience, which leaves me in a funny
place. So I'll explain what that is. So I did a bunch of the systems systems work and in that
I ended up building something that did this kind of similar to solving this problem.
It wasn't for web. It was for native. So we would we had data model in our system,
any mutations to we get sink to iOS and Android, Android apps, and it kind of was very productive
for our team. Didn't handle a lot of the things well. But I was kind of my first introduction to
that idea. And then I wanted to keep using that pattern just to speed. I mean, it's funny because
we did we talk about this stuff like it's new, but native engineers are kind of more used to
this pattern of like keeping the data locally. Probably mostly because they have to deal with
offline a little bit more. But like you're used to native apps, like keeping your data around and
like being able to access it right away. But I shifted back into web and then I wanted to keep
using it. So I started to explore. All right, how do I possibly achieve this? But like everything
that's out there. And I went on this like really crazy journey from discovering orbit, which I
probably come across, which is like a front end tool. And if you're back in as a JSON API,
it does some like kind of smart caching with the objects and kind of understand your schema.
Try to use that got to a certain place, hit a wall. Then I was like, okay, let me
somewhere around this time I did come across replica cache and I remember going to the website
and I was like, no, I deal with this is I don't get it. And I moved on. I moved on to try to make
GraphQL do what I needed to do. I ended up using Herkola bunch that also had some like caching
functionality, a little wall. Yeah, it'll walk with that. Then I was like, let me go look at the
rebel cache thing again. I was like, Oh, wait, this is what I'm looking for. I ended up using
rebel cache. And then now I'm using zero as a with rebel cache, you know, I hit the same walls
where like the windowing I didn't put myself and like some of the permission stuff from the error
stuff. So again, it really focused on solving those problems. And now we have zero. And I'm like,
okay, all the problems I've been looking for for the past four years are now solved,
which means the remaining problems for me are, hey, like making sure like the hover animation
like looks right, which is just not where I came from. I finally achieved what I want to achieve,
but then I'm bottlenecked by like my, my like just front end detail stuff. So it's down to just
CSS now. That's like my, that's what's limiting me to get to where I want.
Yeah, we joke about that. Like sometimes we see bugs, you know, as part of building zero early
on, we decided that we should have a dog food app that we are building, like that's driving the
development of zero. For like a lot of reasons, like one of the one of the reasons is just like,
it seemed like poetic to me, like, like I liked, I liked the elegance of it like that, like
all of these like local first and sync tools, they all make a linear demo, because like linear is
this famous app that uses that has this really great UX. And we made a linear demo with replica
cache, right? But it's a demo, like we knew when we built it that it was a demo. And like with that
word demo, there's like so much loaded, you know, there's always, when you, when if you're a developer
and you see a demo of something, you should just take that to imply there is like some drag and
hidden in this, like, you don't know which ones you don't get to know which ones they are, you know?
But you know, but there's some dragons that like the developer skipped over because it's a demo,
like, and for us, like, you know, with replica cache, you know, like some of those dragons were
like fine green permission and partial sync. And like, you know, much other ones like, like,
like deployment, you know, and so we wanted to like make sure with zero that we were not skipping
over the hard problems that we were not making that same mistake, I wanted to make sure that we
weren't making that mistake again. And like, that we were really building something that you could
use to build real software. So like, the best way to do that is to like build something real,
you know? And then the other thing was like, we knew that zero was going to be open source.
And so we needed a bug tracker. And that meant, like, bar only option with basically GitHub,
you know, or get lab, you know? And like, I just cannot deal with the fact that like, here we are
trying to build like a sync engine for building things like linear. And we're using like, GitHub,
this just is awful. You know, like, I literally sync my GitHub issues into linear and just use
linear as a front end for GitHub. That's how it's how bad it is. We kind of considered something
like that. But no, having your own thing makes total sense for the dog fitting.
It's an open source project, right? So there has to be like a public public. Yeah. Yeah. And
people need to be all file bugs. And you know, and that's kind of interesting too, because like,
like linear, I don't I don't know, I don't know if linear linear doesn't support
fine-grained permissions within a repo. So you can't create to my knowledge. Sorry if I'm wrong
linear folks. I've looked at this like multiple times to my knowledge in linear.
You can't really get private issues now. Yeah. Like, yeah, like, and so, and also,
there's no such thing as public issues. Like you can't create an issue that's world readable.
And I assume this has to do with like design of the sync engine. I don't, I don't know if that's
true. But, uh, but like we, we really needed this for Z bugs, right? Because like, it's an open
source project. You need to be able to see the, see the bugs publicly, comment on them, right?
And because the bugs need to be visible publicly, that means they need to boot up fast. You know,
like you can't wait 10 minute or, you know, five minutes for the thing to sync. You know,
that means you need partial sync. You know, so it's just really interesting to like build a real
app, because it brings up these questions that real users have. Like when, when we were using
rep, when we were doing replica, people would always ask us like, well, what do I do if I have like
a public page that people need to visit without being logged in? And we're like, well, you can like,
you know, you know, but if we're building it for ourselves, right, we're not going to do any,
we're not going to do any of those weird hacks that, that we were maybe suggesting that people do,
you know, like we were going to be like, no, let's just like fix the infrastructure to work the right
way, you know, so that we can do this. Yeah, it's funny just having worked in, you know,
building stuff for developers. I've had this experience so many times where someone mentions
a problem to me and I'm just like, oh yeah, it's annoying. But then I don't think that much of it
that I run into it. And all of a sudden, it's like the number one priority and we got to fix right
away. So it's just, yeah, like it's like, that's just a reality of it. Like until you hit it,
you don't really understand how important it is to fix.
I guess, I guess like, you know, part of it is like we just develop, you know, all of us just
develop a skill for focus, right? So it's like, you know, there's lots of things that you can work
on. There's lots of problems, right? And you naturally develop an ability to like focus on the one
that you're working on, you know, yeah, that's how you need some mechanism. Because like, there's
always a thousand tasks and you just need some mechanism that orders it for you and having your
own product is a very good way to do that. Because you know, at least you're not making up like
working on fake stuff, which as stupid as that sounds, like that's like the biggest challenge.
Like you end up spending a lot of time working on fake made up stuff and having your own thing
kind of really focuses you the posting demos thing. It's it's funny because I I've always felt this
way where I'm like, if I'm going to post a demo showing something off, like it needs to be a thing
that's in production and an idea like even even making money. So I can be like, this is like not
just me messing around. And I remember once I posted a demo of our search, and it was
powered by Replicash, and it was searching through like 50,000 patients. And it was all
instant. And I was, of course, in my usual tone, I was very annoying about it and made fun of
everyone for their stuff not being this good. And so many people got really pissed off and they
started making these demos of being like, this is not even hard. Look what I can do. And every single
one was just someone wiring an on key down to like a query to a server that hits Postgres and
like round trips. And yeah, like when you just do that on a demo, when everything's running locally,
and you can guarantee that the end user is like not too far away from your back,
like all those different variables. Of course, you're going to cheat that.
These are videos of Postgres running locally.
Yeah, yeah, it was all as all local hosts. Well, what first people accuse my video of being all
local hosts, which is a great compliment. I get this all the time when I write show off local
first stuff. They're like, Oh, yeah, like now I've tried deploying the production and I'm like,
bitch, check the URL. That's not say local or first. Post local hosts. Yeah. But yeah, a lot of
people were just posting these like stupid local hosts one. Some people did ones that were actually
deployed. But again, like under perfect conditions, very hard to make something that looks similar,
but an actual app with real world constraints, like we had all sorts of weird problems of like,
okay, this, this business have 50,000 patients to look through. You can't sync the whole patient
because that's way too much data. You have to sync like a partial of it. And then when they click
into it, you have to load the full thing in and then keep track of which patients are interested.
Like all those just things that come up when you build and polish a real world thing.
So I really like, I really try to post stuff that's real world and I expect people to recognize
the difference that people often don't. They just think it's like the same as any other demo.
Yeah. Well, this, this, this goes to like something that also you and I talked about, you know,
in, in DM about like marketing, you know, it's, it's, this is another thing that I've learned a lot
about like over my, my startup journey quest. Like, um, I mean, it's not really people's fault that
they don't see the like, you know, the, the URL is production or they don't like imply that like,
oh, this means it's real or whatever, that they don't get the message that you're sending them. I
mean, you know, I mean, people receive like thousands of messages every day, right, trying to convince
them of something, you know, and, and like, you know, and they, and they are looking at it with
like 10% of their brain, you know, like, it's, it's just really hard to like get a message through,
you know, it's not really anyone's fault, you know, like, it's, it's just the way the, way the world
is, you know, like, so, so like, you know, a big part of marketing, I like realize there's like
something actually, you know, I grew up as like a skater and like, you know, in, in Southern
California. So I grew up like very like anti marketing, you know, like, and I realized there's
actually something kind of like, it's actually kind of a craft to it that it's really interesting,
you know, of like, if you have a product that's good, and you know that it's good, and you know,
that it can help people, you know, marketing is just like finding a way to get them to know that,
you know, like finding a way to do that, you know, like, and there's a lot of interesting craft to
that, you know, yeah, so I mean, it's like, if they don't receive your message, like, it's not,
it's not like something has gone wrong. That's like the expected case, you know.
Yeah, yeah, no, it's true. And to be fair, like, it's always a vocal minority, like that post had
a crazy amount of likes on it. And then maybe like, you know, one or two dozen people that replied
in a way that I found annoying. But it's always like it always ends up working that way.
Yeah, the whole marketing thing is super interesting, too. Like, I'm similar in that
I just had this, you know, in hindsight, naive view of things of being like,
well, if the product is good enough, the marketing doesn't matter, then you go to do
something real and your numbers are flat. And you're like, shit, they're all my deals.
Totally tested by reality. And it turns out like I'm just wrong. So again, my brain just
looked on that as well. And I was like, I just need to do this marketing thing, because it's not
this negative thing that's tricking people into something. It's like this totally other thing that
the reality is you just can't, you just can't operate without. It's been fun and getting into
all that stuff. But I think there is like a sort of like a subtle twist on it, which is like,
if the product is good enough, then the marketing will work. Yeah, it's the market will work. Yeah.
You know, and you know, you have the opportunity to do, at least I like, you know, you have the
opportunity to do like really interesting, like creative working, you know, because you're like
sort of riding on top of this like foundation of a good product. Yeah, you know, yeah, it's funny,
because people come to me a lot being like, Oh, can you give me like marketing advice for this thing?
And the thing that I always have trouble telling them is like, I don't like your product. Like,
I don't think it's good. So like, I can't really come up with that. DAX, you have a hard time
telling somebody that their stuff is bad. That's hard for you to your face directly. When they're
coming to me with such hope in their eyes, like, yeah, you know, it's just like, if I don't like
the product, I just can't the creative part of my brain isn't isn't activated, you know, it has to
align properly. And that, yeah, it just won't work. You can copy paste what someone else did that
worked. And if your product isn't getting, it's just not, yeah, it's not gonna work. Those are
good. It's not it's not two things. But then a day, product and marketing, it's all just one thing.
Like you pick the products that work well, that can be marketed well, your marketing message can
work well. That's like, that's like, that reminds me of this, like other coa, this other sort of like,
phrase that I keep in my head, like, is that like, with, with marketing, like,
novelty is like, is like half the battle, you know, like, you know,
again, it's like, you have to like, you have to get through to people, you know, so like, you
know, actually copying what somebody else has done is like the opposite of like what you should do
for marketing, which is like, which is like a little bit counterintuitive, like you, like,
people get really good at noticing patterns. And what they're, I think what they're really tuning
into is like noticing low effort, you know, which goes back to what we were, what we were talking
about, right? Like, as humans, we're like, we were like bombarded with messages all the time,
right? We're trying to filter them out and we develop patterns for like, which messages are
likely to be useful. And like, one of those heuristics is like, the effort that went into sending the
message, you know, yeah, you know, and if, and if the message is just like a copy of something
that's been done over and over again, that's like, that's like a really easy, like, detect pattern
that is low effort, right? We can probably all, if we just didn't think about it, we can actually
probably all observe the observes within ourselves. Because I've been around long enough where I've
seen things that the first time I looked at it, it looked incredible. And then very quickly, I started
looking at it and literally looked ugly at me. So more recent example is AI generated images.
There was a time where we were like, wow, this is insane. And now it's been like maybe like a
year of us seeing it. We like can instantly tell it's AI generated and our brains just think it's
ugly. But there's like no objective truth to like what looks good or what doesn't. It's just like
whether you've seen it enough times already, which is like kind of mind blowing, saying like
monochrome websites, you know, like,
Yeah, well, my first thought was actually the linear website where I'm like, when I first saw
that I was like, wow, it's good. And now when I see one of those things, it's like a insane
negative reaction I get. And sometimes it's not even low effort. It's, there was a recent case
where I think they even posted they spent like $100,000 on his landing page and like looked so like
that crazy like nightclub flashy glossy reflective thing going on everywhere, but just looked like
a variation of linear and it looked bad to my eyes. You know, it can be it can cost money in
silly low effort, you know, like that's true. There's hard someone to copy the thing. Yeah,
I've just been listening to you guys. And I just want like the people who can nerd out about this
stuff to like enjoy the content. But I have so many like super dumb questions and it might be
helpful for the people like me. Yeah, so I am a front end engineer who did not go further in life
and did I didn't live up to my potential? I don't know what a B tree is. I can start there. What is
a B tree? But that's probably not very interesting. I want to know like zero. What part of because
I'm not, I'm not using it. Dax is so plugged into this stuff. What part of my stack? Like, it's a
library. I I install into my front end application. Yeah, and it replaces my API. It replaces my
database. What how does it all fit? Yeah, yeah, it's zero and in in more general all sync engines.
They they take over the network communication between the client and the server. You know,
so like 100% of people who are built who are listening to this are building a client server
web app, right? You got code on the client, which is, you know, you got code on the server, right?
And the data is on the server and the UI is on the client and you need some way for them to talk
to each other. And the sort of classic way to do this all the way back to the 90s is like the
three tier architecture, right? With like APIs, HTTP APIs that connected, right? And we've gone
through a few variations of HTTP APIs that are like, I don't know, if you're really old like me,
you've got like soap. Oh, yeah. Wow. I like soap. I liked it because they integrated nicely into
Visual Studio and you could just like click it and see everything. I've never heard anyone say
they like soap. So I've never heard that. Like as we speak. Things are like,
that's like soap. And he likes zero. That's a bad sign. So then, you know, we had a show was the
one there was a short lived one after that. And then, and then, you know, we had rest, which,
which lasted a really long time and still going strong. And we also had like GraphQL, right,
which was another variation on this idea. I don't know. I guess you could say like TRPC is like
another version, right? There's a lot of smaller ones, right? But they're all sort of like based on
this idea at the bottom of like HTTP APIs, you know, so the client makes a, at the end of the day,
makes a fetch request and sends some data, the server and get the response, right? And sort of
the fundamental problem is like, you know, if you want the UI to do something, the user presses
something and in order to do that, it needs data from the server, it has to wait for that request to
go to the server and send the data back. And like sort of at a minimum, you're bounded by speed of
light, which is kind of cool. We're like, you know, we're building things where we, we'd care
about the speed of light, you know, but like, you know, for a lot of practical reasons, databases
usually have to be centralized. There's a lot of people that are, have been hopeful about like
distributing databases, but there's really hard technical problems to distributing databases.
And there's also really hard like political problems to distributing databases.
And so for a lot of reasons, databases just end up often being centralized,
usually, usually they're centralized. So that just means like by definition,
there's going to be people, the majority of people on earth are going to be far from your database.
And the speed of their UI is going to be limited by the speed of light. But that's just the beginning,
like if really, if really we were limited by speed of light, like that'd be great, you know, like,
like the distance, like I think the maximum distance from like any two points, like on earth's round
trip is maybe a 300 milliseconds or 400 milliseconds or something like that, you know, it's not great.
It's not great. It's not instant. But you know, that would be fantastic if like our UIs
were maximally 400 milliseconds, like that is not what we experienced. You know,
what we experienced is UIs that are like two seconds late, you know, and like, why is that?
It's because like the database, the application server when it finally receives this request
is doing a bunch of work. And that work takes time. It's because often the UI is doing many requests
to get data, right? It's not doing one, you know, it's like you click on something in the UI and
then like 10 requests happen, you know, one after the next. And so like, in order to make this better,
in order to make these UI better, like we like it's kind of funny, but we have to get the data
to the client before the user needs it, you know, and that's that's what sync is about. That's
what sync is there about is there about continually pushing data from the server to the client ahead
of time, so that the data is there on the client when the client needs it and it can just read it
locally from SSD, which is instant. And so this is all very long. We have answering your question,
which is it takes over a GraphQL and rest. And so we have a library in your client that you talk
to directly that provides an interface that looks like a database. You've got queries, you know,
you can do full arbitrary queries with like, you know, joins and sub selects and filters and
soon, someday aggregations and, you know, everything. But that database is like an illusion. There is
data locally, but like, it's continually being updated by the server who's pushing data to the
client so that it's there when you need it. And so you have like a package that you also run
and install on your server, presumably to run like a zero server or not. What I what I'm super into
about zero is to me, it almost feels like something in the same level as Redis, where like, everyone
knows that they have a database and an application server front end. And like, maybe they add in
Redis to like provide caching in front of the database when, you know, there's too much load.
This is kind of like zero to standalone server. That's kind of like Redis and that it's like a
cache for your database, but it's entirely optimized for the client to be front ends. So you can deploy
these servers around your database. And what I'm really excited by is even in other regions,
right? So you can have your main database and uss one, and you can have a zero replica in uss
to just serving the users there. It's like taking over the responsibility of a read replica, but it's
a read replica optimized for the sync engine, engine purpose. So I can see how this just becomes a
default thing that everyone just deploys around their database. Yeah, so you have the client,
you have this server that we call zero cache that is basically a read replica, like a very fancy
read replica of your database. Yeah. And like a read replica, it replicates your data into like
its own storage, right? But unlike a read replica, like Redis is a cache, right? There's like a
difference between a cache and a replica. The words are used interchangeably, but they're not the same
thing. Like, yeah, you know, like a replica has like a correct snapshot of the database, you know,
at any point in time, cache just has some random subset of it that's been request, right? So
it's a zero cache is a replica, it sits in front of your database, but it also sorry, any kind of
database or like you guys support certain databases currently only postgres, but the way that zero
cache has been it has been designed, it can work with other databases. And like, in fact, we have
like an experimental version of Mongo up and running, right? It just requires any database
with change stream. So I can consume updates in real time and say up to date, yeah, which like most
databases have something like this for read replicas, you know, because they, they know, right? You
have a zero cache and the zero cache also replicates data to the client. So you, so you've got your
primary database, you've got zero cache, which is a replica in the server. And then, and then you
have a subset of that data that gets pushed to the client and actually replicated to the client,
so that you have a consistent snapshot on the client. And then you read against that, that partial
subset that you have on the client, you render instantly. And since you're continuously replicating
to the client, whenever any data changes on the server for any reason, it gets pushed to the client
and the client reactively updates. You get, you get like real time out of it for free.
And you get instant UI. And then as like a little flourish on top, we also allow mutability to the
local data. So you can change the, we have an API where you can change the local data. And those
changes get pushed to the server. And they use replicashes conflict resolution that we talked
about earlier, to resolve conflicts. The end result is like you can, you have an API that looks like
a database on the client, and you can do arbitrary queries to it. And those queries are usually
instantaneous. We'll get back to the usually, maybe in a second. But like the vast majority of the
time, those queries are instantaneous. The queries update reactively, when data on the change of
service. And you can change the data locally. All the queries that are open on the client, they
update automatically, when you instantly, when you change, like that's like a react query kind of
feeling kind of experience. Does that make sense? Like if you, it's like invalidating the local data
whenever you change it. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And to use the same thing, except you get to just give
it normal queries, you're like, yeah, you're just interacting with the data, but it's from users where
time created is within the last week. And that's just a view. And any changes that gets updated,
any mutations that would have affected that query, updated it optimistically. It makes your
front end so stupid. Like, yeah, sounds amazing. The front end side of it just like, it's so dumb.
It's like you barely need a framework at this point. Also, you don't, you don't need the
use optimistic. Like you don't need it. You don't need to write like an optimistic version.
Everything is optimistic by the, I mean, it's just the nature. Because it understands the exact
thing that's being mutated. Yeah. Does that answer your question about like, no, it does. It sounds,
no, it sounds very nice. So that, that zero cache, the server part, you can put those anywhere. And
they're sort of like mitigating the issue of the distance between your users and your database,
because they're constantly being updated from the database. So even if you don't do that,
it's probably fine. Like right now we just have a really matter because you send the data to the
client ahead of time. Yeah. But if you really want to push things and you want to say like, you know,
I want it to be even faster across the world. Like, yeah, you can have zero cache applied. The
same logic you would put a read replica in another region. I think for me now, I'm just like, yeah,
my issue with replicas is like, they're still very annoying to deal with. Like you can do a
read replica of Postgres, but then like now you need an API server there, right? So you'll have to go
to like the primary date, like all that stuff is just a lot. Whereas with this,
I really, that's not the thing I really care about. I mean, I'm, I'm like getting into stuff.
Like what I do care about, I guess, questions I would have is like, well, the first one would be
if you have a lot of data. And I think you said you can partially send down data so you can choose
for like given pages, I guess, or routes, you can choose to like only send certain data down. Is that
the idea? Oh, this is the part that I'm like, I love the most. I mean, so it's query based, you
know, at the end of the day, you have a query API on the client. You do you do a query. And so
the data that backs that query is what gets synced to the client. Like we take that query
and we send it to the server. And the data that's needed to answer that query is the data that gets
synced to the client. And then you do another query and that data gets synced to the client.
And that's just how it works. Like all the queries that you have open are the data that's getting
synced. So you control what data gets synced by what queries you make, you know, you're in complete
control and you have the full power of a query language to to do that, you know, we say, we say
a query language. Is it SQL? It looks SQL-esque. Yeah, it looks. Yeah. Yeah. And it's on the front
end. This is all the front end that you're writing these. It's inspired. The design is
inspired by Kaisley, if you're familiar with that. Oh, yeah, sure. The thing that's really cool is
a way this actually maps down on like component based frameworks, because like a component based
framework is you just have like nested things, right? Like when you land on a page, the outer most
component loads. So any queries you put there will get loaded right away. But then when you click
into stuff, like the inside changes, right? So let's say you land on the page, you have like
a header with like the user info. So of course, the user info is going to be synced right away.
But then if you navigate to a deeper component, there might be queries in that component, right?
That won't sync right away. But once you navigate in there, then it'll start syncing. So it like
very elegantly maps back to you don't sync stuff until the users show an interest in it.
Yeah, because unless they clicked in there, like that query would not have loaded and when I started
being tracked. And the reason we switched, so we didn't plan on switching that as the console over
to zero, because we haven't working on Replicash, it's fine. But then we had a situation, a feature
where we wanted to show you the diffs of every single SC deploy has ever happened.
Stinking all of that at a time is way too much data. But if it's naturally with let's just wait
till you go into a specific deploy to look at it to then sync it. And that's kind of what forced our
transition of moving to zero, because implementing all that on top Replicash manually, it would
just been a subpar equivalent to what zero can can already do. So now we're like really excited
to move everything over is now that part of our app is like really nice and the rest of it now
looks forced by comparison. Well, I'm gonna dig in my my main job, like my primary day job,
we use Postgres. So I could actually start poking around. Yeah, I mean, it's kind of interesting
for you, because I don't, I don't like immediately know if there's like a good use case. Yeah, this
time use use case is like very like antithetical to local first, I feel like. But then I think about
like, you just it's when you talk about it, actually, you should do both things. Like, I feel like
you should probably still use it for any of the interactivity stuff. There's just like,
our experience is slow, and it could be fast. So it's kind of like, you got to figure out how
to do both things, we have to serve a million clicks from Google every day. But we also need to figure
out how to make the people who stick around and use our app a lot, make it fast. Like we kind of
just have to do both, I feel like. Yeah, there's no there's no downside. There's no downside with
having a page. It's entirely public powered by zero. Like there's a so work. That's what's nice
about this moment. Well, there could be like cost downsides for like, for like, I don't know, I
don't know what your day job is, Adam, actually. But like, you know, the the server is like more
expensive to run than like, you know, I don't know, like the normal web server. Yeah, if you go look
at if you go look at his Aurora bill, you're going to be like, nevermind. Because whatever they're
paying for Aurora is. And I'm not too worried about the compute, I guess. So Adam's a founder of
stat news, which if you're not familiar with, it's like the sports statistics. Source for like all
sports or not all sports, but like most of the sports. And they get like a crazy amount of traffic.
And it's mostly public, mostly public traffic, but they also have like power users that are.
Yeah, mostly like search engine. Yeah, that are like logged in and doing more intense stuff.
I mean, I'd like to like dig into it. I mean, the sort of like been trying to think about how to
talk about this. I actually need to do a blog post about this or something like that. Yeah,
we launched zero alpha right at the right before Christmas. So now it's been just about two months
that has been public. And so we've got a lot, a lot of interesting feedback. People are already
starting to use an introduction. Thanks, Dax. And I think like, you know, we, we decided, you know,
as we talked about a little bit ago to take on this really hard problem, you know, like some of the
stuff we're doing is like, you know, like kind of like leading edge, like software engineering, you know,
and features. And you know, we're, it's like, we didn't talk about this at all, but like,
what makes zero possible is this new career engine that we wrote. We wrote our own career engine from
scratch. Like, like, so it's the API is kind of like inspired, but it doesn't bottom out at
SQL. Like, we have our own career engine. And we had to do that in order to make this work in
order to make this efficient. This is why we didn't do this way back with rebel cash. And this is
all built on this like theory of databases called IBM incremental view maintenance, which is like
pretty bleeding edge stuff. So this is all to say, like, we're going after like, this really big
problem here. You know, I think, I think what bun is doing is, is, is really inspiring too.
I would kind of put us in that, in that category of people who are tackling a really hard problem.
And it's going to be a lot of work. And like, initially, like today, you know, like zero is a
good choice if you are willing to run your own servers, if you're willing to run Dockerized,
like servers in AWS, and you have like, you know, enough skill and energy and need to like deal
with all the configuration crap of like running AWS, or if you want to use SST. And you know,
it's fairly expensive to run. I have to like put together like estimates of like, what the
minimal like deployment looks like, you know, and there's, you know, there's sharp edges, both in API,
in bugs, in like costs, all kinds of stuff. That's the reality. But like the value, I think, you know,
it's already valuable for, for like a surprising amount of applications, you know, it's already
like a really useful tool for all kinds of products like we have, you know, we probably got like a
dozen people running in production now. And like, we get feedback all the time about like how like
amazing the experiences and like people who are excited about the vision. So I have to find a
way to like talk about the vision of where we're going, you know, and the reality of like where
we are right now. So people can like understand like whether it's the right time for them to jump
in in or not, you know, yeah, sure. Yeah, I mean, I think just seeing how much work it is is also
kind of interesting. That kind of communicates a value like, I mean, even just stuff that I'm aware
of, which is just like to it's like a subset of all your problems. It's the ones that I've run into.
But yeah, like eventually, like, you know, this cache needs to be sharded. Yeah, the the the
sharding plus like, you know, this idea of can each zero cache only replicate as upset that data
was it looked like when there's like terabytes of data in your database. I'm also very surprised.
I think I just am not going to be be surprised by this. But like you said, like right now, it's
the bar of being able to actually use it is definitely higher than where it will be.
I'm shocked how many people still do it anyway. Like I'm surprised by how many people I see in
there, like figuring out all this container stuff and like, you know, actually feel like this is
worth my time to, you know, figure all this stuff out, even how bleeding edge it is. Like, I I'm like
working on deployment stuff. So I'd like spend all my time with this stuff. And even then I'm like
running into stuff I don't know. Yeah, it's like, it's like incredible how people already
want to do that. You know, I have this problem as like the creator of the thing, right? Whenever
anybody hits like a problem, I'm like deeply embarrassed, you know, like, Oh my God, I can't believe,
you know, this is, we have this public this way, you know, like, like, and, and, but then I come back
to like, we built like a bug tracker, you know, like we built, we built a linear with this thing.
That's true. Yeah, kind of like all every last feature that linear has, but it is a good,
it is a good, you know, partial subset of the features of linear. And in particular,
like the core feature of linear, its performance, you know, yeah. And, and not only that, it has
some features that linear doesn't have, it has public bugs, it has fine grained permissions,
it loads fast, you know, when you enter a detailed page. And yet, you know, Z bugs, Z bugs has like
a thousand bucks and like a total of like maybe 15,000 comments, you know, so it's not like the
world's most massive, like bug tracker, you know, but that is the shape, the rough shape of a lot
of real applications, you know, like, and, and so I think, you know, what you're seeing, the reason
why there's a lot of people in there fighting to figure this stuff out and, and, and in early
is because when you step back and you think about that, like, wow, you know, like, you can build,
like, you know, a subset of linear with like a few people in, in like, few months with this
technology, you know, that's like a pretty, you know, like, that's a really hard thing to build,
otherwise, a really hard thing. And, you know, in a lot of, a lot of people want to build something
like that, you know, like that, that describes like a wide variety of SaaS applications, you know,
and so if you look at that and you say, wow, this is already able to do this, and these guys worked
on Replicash before, and they're in it for the long term, and this is going to keep getting better
and better, you know, like, for a lot of, for a lot of companies that are starting something new,
that is roughly like a SaaS shaped thing that needs to be fast, you know, it looks like a good
time to get it. I generally don't have much motivation to convince people to use a certain
technology, because yeah, it's just what does it matter to me? But the thing with this category is
I just want as a user to have better software that I could use. So I'm like obsessed with getting
more people into this, because they're going to build stuff that I can use and really enjoy. It's
like, once you've used enough of these things, you just start hating, like, the thing you were
saying about GitHub issues, like it feels 10 times more painful when you're aware of what it could
be like. So I'm really looking forward to even just this cohort of applications, like graduating
and becoming real products, and like the more that get added on over the next couple of years,
I just feel like there's going to be a generation of products who just feel finally so good on the
web. Like, we've been chasing the native feeling for so long, and it feels like I can see that
happening within view. Yeah, yeah, I mean, wouldn't wouldn't one of my co-founders that added it and
Rossi Corp is this guy, Eric Arvetson, he's not has, hasn't have a presence on Twitter, but
we've been working together ever since I was in college, like, and he worked with, I recruited
into Google. He's one of my oldest friends and collaborators. And when we started doing JavaScript,
way back in the day, doing those UI widgets, you know, what we were doing was like drop down menus,
windows, scroll bars, you know, stuff like this, we were making UI widget, because we wanted to make
the web work like a real, like, like real native apps, the as good as real native apps. And I think
like there was something way back there really interesting and deep that we didn't totally recognize,
which is that like web software is client server software. And like those native apps that have
that feel that you love that, you know, when people, why can't web apps be like Winamp, you know,
that was like, we're always saying Winamp is amazing. And like part of that is like all the
stuff about JavaScript, we can solve all that. But part of it is that the web Winamp is Spotify,
it's client server software, it's not local software, you know, the data is remote. And so
part people, people always bitch about how bad web software is and part of it is legit, you know,
and part of it is solvable. But a big part of it is like networking, you know,
Yeah, so architecture of it. Yeah. Yeah. And a big part of the value of web software,
the reason we're using it is because it's client server, you know, and so solving that,
making that part as good as native software is really deep. And fun problem and like,
you know, something that I feel like I didn't really like, I didn't really go after like fully,
you know, before, but like we're doing the zero and, and I'm like, I'm like stoked to finally be
going for it. And I think like a lot of other people, it's funny, like when you really go for
something, like when we announce zero, like the amount of just like encouragement from the community
was like, it was just completely inspiring. And like, like, it felt so good. Like people who are
competitors were like, wow, you know, this is epic. Like, you know, like, I'm like, so glad
that you guys are going for this. And we've got a lot of people involved just like for that reason.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a it's super exciting. And like I said, for me, it's been just,
and I think I started down this path in 2020, I think, it's been five years. It's been a very
long time. And just to see even just the transition from me talking about this and then it just me
talking to no one is like kind of going out at the wind and nobody even like knew what I was talking
about. Everyone was kind of focused somewhere else. To now like everyone gets it and it was kind
of on everyone's radar. And yeah, it's cool to be able to actually like witness that transition.
Because I never felt like I'd been early to anything. I always felt like I arrived.
It's a little too late. But then with this, it feels like, okay, I like actually was able to see
something and follow it through. Yeah. Yeah, it's always fun. Anything else you wanted to
chat about? No, I mean, you know, thanks for having me on. I really appreciate like you pushing us.
Like I've said this before, but actually like you are a big reason we did zero.
Like pushing on replica and like really getting us to think about like solving this problem for
real. But yeah, this has been super fun. Thanks for having me on. Yeah, always a good time.
Thanks Aaron. All right.